---
published: true
---
## Long, long COVID
There’s an implication when an illness is psychogenic that it’s ‘in the imagination’ or ‘all in your mind’. This implication is damaging and false. To treat depression as imagined is to treat the subject as if he could just ‘turn it off’, which we know he cannot do, since he would if he could. I see this confusion coming up with long COVID: people refuse to believe that long COVID could be psychological because they need to believe that it is also real. These beliefs do not need to be opposed. Your immune system can tell you that something is wrong but so can your mind. Both are attuned to real things; its just  easier to measure the things the immune system picks up, since they are simple biological matter, than the things picked up by the mind, which are social relations, feelings in the air, and other such structural consequences of COVID.

At present, we don’t know a huge amount about long COVID. We know that it manifests in fatigue, and we know that it follows COVID, but we don’t know what causes it. It certainly could be a physical infection; but it could also be a fact about the relation between individual and environment, picked up by the organism. If either of these were the case, neither would be ‘made up’ or ‘imaginary’. Just as your immune system monitors internal physical health, your mind monitors ‘social health’ - it is populated with facts about the state of the world you live in and your relation to it. And just as your mind can be mistaken about social relations, your immune system can be mistaken about whether you are ill or not. Both, then, are imperfect physical systems aimed at understanding the world. The difficulty with long COVID, then, comes from deciding how we are going to treat it. Do we treat it as an immunological problem, or is this too narrow a reduction? This is by no means a purely academic debate, since the decision we make has profound consequences. If we treat long COVID as an immunological phenomenon, then medical intervention is the only solution. However, if we treat long COVID as something more complex - something that cannot be explained simply as a consequence of physical infection - then medical intervention is going to cause problems. If your mind is telling you there’s a problem, but it isn’t quite clear on what that is, then repeated invasive procedures aimed at finding out ‘what’s wrong with you’ is going to reinforce to your entire being that there is, in fact, something wrong. Hence, only if we are confident that the problem of long COVID can be solved at the immunological level should we hand over control of the problem to the medical establishment.

The medical establishment is only adequate to solve long COVID if it is a strictly physical problem: if none of its causes manifest in the social or psychological spheres. If even some of its causes manifest above the physical level, then medical intervention is only going to make the problem worse. Only if we are fully convinced that the problem can be totally understood at the level of the virus can we be confident in pursuing medical interventions at the expense of other methods.
The human being is far more complex than the specialised medical establishment, with its focus on local and specific phenomena, is able to comprehend. Hence, we should be skeptical about ceding authority to it in the solution of long COVID, since the status of the illness is unclear. We don’t understand its causes or its effects. The medical methodology can only see clearly and distinctly observable physical causes and effects - to say nothing of the social, psychological, or environmental forces which may be playing a causal role - and so, if it is allowed to proceed as the only investigation into the subject’s condition, it risks foreclosing on the possibility of a non-specific, non-local cause. This is a risky hypothesis to rule out prior to investigation, and doing so has the effect of subordinating the will of the subject to the authority of the medical institution. If it is insisted upon that the cause is physical and can be uncovered by the methods of the medical establishment, then it is insisted that the causal property be an external one existing in the visible world. To the extent that the subject puts their faith in the methods of the medical establishment, then, they lose the ability to gain knowledge about anything that they cannot clearly and distinctly perceive. This means that they lose the ability to conceive of any cause other than that suggested by the medical establishment. This isn’t too much of a problem if the problem gets solved, but if medicine can’t solve long COVID (and the recent history of pharmacological interventions should make us doubt its ability) then the subject is out of options: they cannot admit any other kind of evidence and so collapse into ‘learned helplessness’. So, we are really rolling the dice when we trust the medical establishment whole-heartedly to solve long COVID, without any investigation of its other dimensions: only if it is able to solve the problem will our commitment be rewarded, and if the problem cannot be solved by its normal tools - pharmacological intervention, therapy, etc - then we’re left clueless as to where to look.

It may be, for instance, that long COVID is the product of reduced immune system owing to infection plus the deprivation of sociality. Hence, it would be shown that restoring the subject to sociality would diminish the symptoms of long COVID. Or it might be shown that having COVID changes an individual’s perception of their safety relative to the world, and that this manifests in depleted energy despite there being no significant change in the body’s internal economy. In either case, trying to identify the physical cause and find the correct pharmacological intervention to solve it is not going to help anything: it’s just going to keep the subject away from their friends and reinforce their belief that they are vulnerable. So if we are going to go down the medical route, we best be pretty sure that the medical hypothesis is the best one, and that other hypotheses are unlikely to work. Again, none is to say that long COVID is not real, or serious, or physical: just that trying to solve it with the tools of the medical establishment alone is like turning up to a plumbing job with nothing but a hammer, on the basis that you probably won’t need to screw anything down.
