---
published: true
---
### chatting shit
I have finished. After eight long months, I have finished: the proposal is submitted. I feel a mixture of relief and loss. In this way, it reminds me of my feelings after a good shit: glad to have finished it, to have made something concrete and external, but a little disappointed that the experience is over, a little distraught at the possibility that, perhaps, I might never be able to make something quite that good again.

In many ways, speech and shit are very similar: they both involve taking something from the inside and putting it outside. At school, my friends and I lived by the saying, ‘poo’s funny’. When asked why we were laughing, that was our response. This, we contended, was the basic fact upon which all other facts are based. Psychologists think that the way we relate to our shit says a lot about how we relate to the world, because shit is ‘an extension of man in a medium other than him’ - it is a definite record of man’s impact upon the world, offensively, irrevocably there. 

Some kids are proud of their poo; others are embarrassed; and therein, some people think, lie the secrets of human life. I relate to my speech much as I relate to my shit: when the urge comes, I am keen to go and do it; when I am doing it, I focus on it, and focus hard; when I finish, I try to forget about it. I try to complete my functions: to get them done. Freud would say this has something to do with the death impulse - unable to bear existence, I seek to concretise it, to pin it down like one of Nietzsche’s birds, even though in doing so I externalise it, give it a life of its own, such that it begins to decay.

Hence, the question of the good life can be brought into orbit around the question of digestion. If all we did was eat to get full and shit to get empty, our life would be meagre indeed, at least as far as food was concerned. Whilst eating and shitting may function to fill and empty, it is the taking pleasure in these acts that accounts for the incredible complexity of culture - for Heston Blumenthal, for Armitage Shanks, for James Joyce, and bidets. So, rather than writing to get it done, I should be writing to enjoy it, because making this my goal allows me to understand writing not as a big shit that needs to be finished, but rather as a constant process of consumption-digestion-externalisation which, all things considered, I should hope to continue for the rest of my life. It allows me to see the benefit of writing not in the creation of the external thing, but in its facilitating this ongoing back-and-forth between me and the world I inhabit.

_(The similarity between shit and speech is not trivial, either. Dogs, for instance, navigate using shit, and the arrangement of turds on their morning walk reads like a sort of social digest: here was dog A stepping out with dog B, who’s turds were normally seen with those of dog D, etc etc…)_

I read recently that the drive to be happy, whilst often conceived (and quite often realised) as a selfish one, is at base a drive derived from duty: you owe it to the people around you to be happy. Obviously, this isn’t entirely your responsibility - the situation you’re in massively impacts your ability to be happy - but that just means that there exists a social responsibility to create the sort of world that more people can be happy in. That would mean that when we spread the shit we are doing so in a generative way, like spreading manure on a field, rather than a destructive way, like pointing a fan at your friends and unloading three days of coffee and fruit into the mechanism.

So in order for other people to like your shit, it has to be made of the right sort of stuff, and spread in the right sort of place. Diagnosis, as a method, is bad shit because it is about highlighting problems and then trying to fix them - it is inherently negative. Hence the language of diagnosis gives us negative shit-speech: its about taking my shit and giving it to you, stinking, for you to find some value in, so that you will give it back to me, fixed. This is common and is probably a necessary part of life: we can't all see the beauty in shit all the time, it gets too much.

Interaction, then, is about finding the immense power of growth in decay: about finding that seedling sprouting from the manure. That seedling might be hope, or humour, or empathy, but the diagnostic complex functions only to make people fascinated with their own shit, not to engage in this collective alchemy together. This mutual support, I contend, is how we progress.

So, as with all things, we have to find ourselves a balance. We have to recognise that there is a shit tonne of negativity in the world, but we also have to recognise that the bowels of negativity are endless, that we cannot seek and solve constantly, lest we end up spreading the wrong kind of shit. That being said, we can’t just avoid negativity either: that’s how you get new age mindfulness, CBT, and government-style mental health awareness that says ‘just go easy on yourself!’ without addressing the social relations that mandated the self-abuse. Hence, we have to consume negativity and positivity, and share both with others: attempt to transmogrify the negativity, spread positivity where you can, and allow others to help when you can’t.

One last note on shit-speech: you’ll have a tendency to think nothing is ever good enough to show other people, and you’re right - because, at the end of the day, the thing that you have made is shit. You’ve taken something decaying, a bit of a biological process, and tried to freeze it into a permanent idol - so don’t act surprised when it starts to smell weird. Instead, recognise that the beauty of shit comes from the recognition that shit is the condition of all life, that without shit, nothing would grow. The beauty of us, I suppose, is that we are able to see, in the mountains of shit we have erected around ourselves, some glimmer of beauty, some hope of new life. In The Dispossessed, Ursula le Guin describes a people who ‘lived among mountains of excrement, but never mentioned shit.’ We have to be careful that, in our avoidance of the topic, we do not forget what is good about shit, or fail to recognise when too much of the wrong sort of shit is coming out. And, most importantly, we have to remember the golden rule: poo is funny.
